README.md, before:

<a name="readme-top"></a>

<div align="center">

<img height="120" src="https://github.com/Sitoi/ai-commit/blob/main/images/logo.png?raw=true">

<h1>AI Commit</h1>

Use OpenAI / Azure OpenAI / DeepSeek / Gemini API to review Git changes, generate conventional commit messages that meet the conventions, simplify the commit process, and keep the commit conventions consistent.

**English** · [简体中文](./README.zh_CN.md) · [Report Bug][github-issues-link] · [Request Feature][github-issues-link]

<!-- SHIELD GROUP -->

[![][github-contributors-shield]][github-contributors-link]
[![][github-forks-shield]][github-forks-link]
[![][github-stars-shield]][github-stars-link]
[![][github-issues-shield]][github-issues-link]
[![][vscode-marketplace-shield]][vscode-marketplace-link]
[![][total-installs-shield]][total-installs-link]
[![][avarage-rating-shield]][avarage-rating-link]
[![][github-license-shield]][github-license-link]

![](https://github.com/sitoi/ai-commit/blob/main/aicommit.gif?raw=true)

</div>

## ✨ Features

- 🤯 Support generating commit messages based on git diffs using ChatGPT / Azure API / DeepSeek / Gemini API.
- 🗺️ Support multi-language commit messages.
- 😜 Support adding Gitmoji.
- 🛠️ Support custom system prompt.
- 📝 Support Conventional Commits specification.

## 📦 Installation

1. Search for "AI Commit" in VSCode and click the "Install" button.
2. Install it directly from the [Visual Studio Code Marketplace](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=Sitoi.ai-commit).

> **Note**\
> Make sure your node version >= 16

## 🤯 Usage

1. Ensure that you have installed and enabled the "AI Commit" extension.
2. In VSCode settings, locate the "ai-commit" configuration options and configure them as needed.
3. Make changes in your project and add the changes to the staging area (git add).
4. (Optional) If you want to provide additional context for the commit message, type it in the Source Control panel's message input box before clicking the AI Commit button.
5. Next to the commit message input box in the "Source Control" panel, click the "AI Commit" icon button. After clicking, the extension will generate a commit message (considering any additional context if provided) and populate it in the input box.
6. Review the generated commit message, and if you are satisfied, proceed to commit your changes.

> **Note**\
> If the code exceeds the maximum token length, consider adding it to the staging area in batches.

### ⚙️ Configuration

> **Note** Version >= 0.0.5 Don't need to configure `EMOJI_ENABLED` and `FULL_GITMOJI_SPEC`, Default Prompt is [prompt/with_gitmoji.md](./prompt/with_gitmoji.md), If don't need to use `Gitmoji`. Please set `SYSTEM_PROMPT` to your custom prompt, please refer to [prompt/without_gitmoji.md](./prompt/without_gitmoji.md).

In the VSCode settings, locate the "ai-commit" configuration options and configure them as needed:

| Configuration      |  Type  |       Default        | Required |                                                       Notes                                                        |
| :----------------- | :----: | :------------------: | :------: | :----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------: |
| AI_PROVIDER        | string |        openai        |   Yes    |                                     Select AI Provider: `openai` or `gemini`.                                      |
| OPENAI_API_KEY     | string |         None         |   Yes    |    Required when `AI Provider` is set to `OpenAI`. [OpenAI token](https://platform.openai.com/account/api-keys)    |
| OPENAI_BASE_URL    | string |         None         |    No    |                If using Azure, use: https://{resource}.openai.azure.com/openai/deployments/{model}                 |
| OPENAI_MODEL       | string |        gpt-4o        |   Yes    |      OpenAI MODEL, you can select a model from the list by running the `Show Available OpenAI Models` command      |
| AZURE_API_VERSION  | string |         None         |    No    |                                                 AZURE_API_VERSION                                                  |
| OPENAI_TEMPERATURE | number |         0.7          |    No    |      Controls randomness in the output. Range: 0-2. Lower values: more focused, Higher values: more creative       |
| GEMINI_API_KEY     | string |         None         |   Yes    |     Required when `AI Provider` is set to `Gemini`. [Gemini API key](https://makersuite.google.com/app/apikey)     |
| GEMINI_MODEL       | string | gemini-2.0-flash-001 |   Yes    |                       Gemini MODEL. Currently, model selection is limited to configuration.                        |
| GEMINI_TEMPERATURE | number |         0.7          |    No    | Controls randomness in the output. Range: 0-2 for Gemini. Lower values: more focused, Higher values: more creative |
| AI_COMMIT_LANGUAGE | string |          en          |   Yes    |                                               Supports 19 languages                                                |
| SYSTEM_PROMPT      | string |         None         |    No    |                                                Custom system prompt                                                |

## ⌨️ Local Development

You can use Github Codespaces for online development:

[![][github-codespace-shield]][github-codespace-link]

Alternatively, you can clone the repository and run the following commands for local development:

```bash
$ git clone https://github.com/sitoi/ai-commit.git
$ cd ai-commit
$ npm install
```

Open the project folder in VSCode. Press F5 to run the project. This will open a new Extension Development Host window and launch the plugin within it.

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions of all types are more than welcome, if you are interested in contributing code, feel free to check out our GitHub [Issues][github-issues-link] to get stuck in to show us what you’re made of.

[![][pr-welcome-shield]][pr-welcome-link]

### 💗 All Thanks To Our Contributors

[![][github-contrib-shield]][github-contrib-link]

## 🔗 Links

### Credits

- **auto-commit** - <https://github.com/lynxife/auto-commit>
- **opencommit** - <https://github.com/di-sukharev/opencommit>

---

## 📝 License

This project is [MIT](./LICENSE) licensed.

<!-- LINK GROUP -->

[github-codespace-link]: https://codespaces.new/sitoi/ai-commit
[github-codespace-shield]: https://github.com/sitoi/ai-commit/blob/main/images/codespaces.png?raw=true
[github-contributors-link]: https://github.com/sitoi/ai-commit/graphs/contributors
[github-contributors-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/contributors/sitoi/ai-commit?color=c4f042&labelColor=black&style=flat-square
[github-forks-link]: https://github.com/sitoi/ai-commit/network/members
[github-forks-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/forks/sitoi/ai-commit?color=8ae8ff&labelColor=black&style=flat-square
[github-issues-link]: https://github.com/sitoi/ai-commit/issues
[github-issues-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/issues/sitoi/ai-commit?color=ff80eb&labelColor=black&style=flat-square
[github-license-link]: https://github.com/sitoi/ai-commit/blob/main/LICENSE
[github-license-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/license/sitoi/ai-commit?color=white&labelColor=black&style=flat-square
[github-stars-link]: https://github.com/sitoi/ai-commit/network/stargazers
[github-stars-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/stars/sitoi/ai-commit?color=ffcb47&labelColor=black&style=flat-square
[pr-welcome-link]: https://github.com/sitoi/ai-commit/pulls
[pr-welcome-shield]: https://img.shields.io/badge/🤯_pr_welcome-%E2%86%92-ffcb47?labelColor=black&style=for-the-badge
[github-contrib-link]: https://github.com/sitoi/ai-commit/graphs/contributors
[github-contrib-shield]: https://contrib.rocks/image?repo=sitoi%2Fai-commit
[vscode-marketplace-link]: https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=Sitoi.ai-commit
[vscode-marketplace-shield]: https://img.shields.io/vscode-marketplace/v/Sitoi.ai-commit.svg?label=vscode%20marketplace&color=blue&labelColor=black&style=flat-square
[total-installs-link]: https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=Sitoi.ai-commit
[total-installs-shield]: https://img.shields.io/vscode-marketplace/d/Sitoi.ai-commit.svg?&color=greeen&labelColor=black&style=flat-square
[avarage-rating-link]: https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=Sitoi.ai-commit
[avarage-rating-shield]: https://img.shields.io/vscode-marketplace/r/Sitoi.ai-commit.svg?&color=green&labelColor=black&style=flat-square

Commit message:

feat(commit): 添加提交上下文构建与统一 OpenAI 提示
原因：
- 提升生成提交信息的上下文质量，减少无关噪音

变更：
- 新增 src/commit-context.ts，支持收集 staged/unstaged 变更、当前分支与最近提交，支持排除锁文件与截断 diff
- 重构提示系统为可配置模板并使用统一的 OpenAICompletion 调用生成提交信息
- 移除 Gemini 相关实现及依赖，精简配置项与 package 描述
- 添加 sanitizeCommitMessage 输出清洗，更新 tsconfig 与若干配置说明

影响：
- 可能移除对 Gemini 的原生支持，配置项与行为存在兼容性变化

README.md, after:

<a name="readme-top"></a>

<div align="center">

<img height="120" src="https://github.com/Sitoi/ai-commit/blob/main/images/logo.png?raw=true">

<h1>AI Commit</h1>

Use OpenAI / Azure OpenAI / DeepSeek / Gemini API to review Git changes, generate conventional commit messages that meet the conventions, simplify the commit process, and keep the commit conventions consistent.

**English** · [简体中文](./README.zh_CN.md) · [Report Bug][github-issues-link] · [Request Feature][github-issues-link]

<!-- SHIELD GROUP -->

[![][github-contributors-shield]][github-contributors-link]
[![][github-forks-shield]][github-forks-link]
[![][github-stars-shield]][github-stars-link]
[![][github-issues-shield]][github-issues-link]
[![][vscode-marketplace-shield]][vscode-marketplace-link]
[![][total-installs-shield]][total-installs-link]
[![][avarage-rating-shield]][avarage-rating-link]
[![][github-license-shield]][github-license-link]

![](https://github.com/sitoi/ai-commit/blob/main/aicommit.gif?raw=true)

</div>

## ✨ Features

- 🤯 Support generating commit messages based on git diffs using ChatGPT / Azure API / DeepSeek / Gemini API.
- 🗺️ Support multi-language commit messages.
- 😜 Support adding Gitmoji.
- 🛠️ Support custom system prompt.
- 📝 Support Conventional Commits specification.

## 📦 Installation

1. Search for "AI Commit" in VSCode and click the "Install" button.
2. Install it directly from the [Visual Studio Code Marketplace](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=Sitoi.ai-commit).

> **Note**\
> Make sure your node version >= 16

## 🤯 Usage

1. Ensure that you have installed and enabled the "AI Commit" extension.
2. In VSCode settings, locate the "ai-commit" configuration options and configure them as needed.
3. Make changes in your project and add the changes to the staging area (git add).
4. (Optional) If you want to provide additional context for the commit message, type it in the Source Control panel's message input box before clicking the AI Commit button.
5. Next to the commit message input box in the "Source Control" panel, click the "AI Commit" icon button. After clicking, the extension will generate a commit message (considering any additional context if provided) and populate it in the input box.
6. Review the generated commit message, and if you are satisfied, proceed to commit your changes.

> **Note**\
> If the code exceeds the maximum token length, consider adding it to the staging area in batches.

### ⚙️ Configuration

> **Note** Version >= 0.0.5 Don't need to configure `EMOJI_ENABLED` and `FULL_GITMOJI_SPEC`, Default Prompt is [prompt/with_gitmoji.md](./prompt/with_gitmoji.md), If don't need to use `Gitmoji`. Please set `SYSTEM_PROMPT` to your custom prompt, please refer to [prompt/without_gitmoji.md](./prompt/without_gitmoji.md).

In the VSCode settings, locate the "ai-commit" configuration options and configure them as needed:

| Configuration      |  Type  |       Default        | Required |                                                       Notes                                                        |
| :----------------- | :----: | :------------------: | :------: | :----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------: |
| AI_PROVIDER        | string |        openai        |   Yes    |                                     Select AI Provider: `openai` or `gemini`.                                      |
| OPENAI_API_KEY     | string |         None         |   Yes    |    Required when `AI Provider` is set to `OpenAI`. [OpenAI token](https://platform.openai.com/account/api-keys)    |
| OPENAI_BASE_URL    | string |         None         |    No    |                If using Azure, use: https://{resource}.openai.azure.com/openai/deployments/{model}                 |
| OPENAI_MODEL       | string |        gpt-4o        |   Yes    |      OpenAI MODEL, you can select a model from the list by running the `Show Available OpenAI Models` command      |
| AZURE_API_VERSION  | string |         None         |    No    |                                                 AZURE_API_VERSION                                                  |
| OPENAI_TEMPERATURE | number |         0.7          |    No    |      Controls randomness in the output. Range: 0-2. Lower values: more focused, Higher values: more creative       |
| GEMINI_API_KEY     | string |         None         |   Yes    |     Required when `AI Provider` is set to `Gemini`. [Gemini API key](https://makersuite.google.com/app/apikey)     |
| GEMINI_MODEL       | string | gemini-2.0-flash-001 |   Yes    |                       Gemini MODEL. Currently, model selection is limited to configuration.                        |
| GEMINI_TEMPERATURE | number |         0.7          |    No    | Controls randomness in the output. Range: 0-2 for Gemini. Lower values: more focused, Higher values: more creative |
| AI_COMMIT_LANGUAGE | string |          en          |   Yes    |                                               Supports 19 languages                                                |
| AI_COMMIT_SYSTEM_PROMPT      | string |         None         |    No    |                                          Custom system prompt (overrides default)                                   |
| AI_COMMIT_INCLUDE_REPO_CONTEXT | boolean |        true        |    No    | Include current branch + recent commits in the context sent to the AI                                               |
| AI_COMMIT_EXCLUDE_LOCKFILES    | boolean |        true        |    No    | Exclude common lockfiles from diffs sent to the AI                                                                   |
| AI_COMMIT_MAX_DIFF_CHARS       | number  |         0          |    No    | Max characters of diff to include (0 = unlimited). Useful to avoid context overflow                                 |

## ⌨️ Local Development

You can use Github Codespaces for online development:

[![][github-codespace-shield]][github-codespace-link]

Alternatively, you can clone the repository and run the following commands for local development:

```bash
$ git clone https://github.com/sitoi/ai-commit.git
$ cd ai-commit
$ npm install
```

Open the project folder in VSCode. Press F5 to run the project. This will open a new Extension Development Host window and launch the plugin within it.

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions of all types are more than welcome, if you are interested in contributing code, feel free to check out our GitHub [Issues][github-issues-link] to get stuck in to show us what you’re made of.

[![][pr-welcome-shield]][pr-welcome-link]

### 💗 All Thanks To Our Contributors

[![][github-contrib-shield]][github-contrib-link]

## 🔗 Links

### Credits

- **auto-commit** - <https://github.com/lynxife/auto-commit>
- **opencommit** - <https://github.com/di-sukharev/opencommit>

---

## 📝 License

This project is [MIT](./LICENSE) licensed.

<!-- LINK GROUP -->

[github-codespace-link]: https://codespaces.new/sitoi/ai-commit
[github-codespace-shield]: https://github.com/sitoi/ai-commit/blob/main/images/codespaces.png?raw=true
[github-contributors-link]: https://github.com/sitoi/ai-commit/graphs/contributors
[github-contributors-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/contributors/sitoi/ai-commit?color=c4f042&labelColor=black&style=flat-square
[github-forks-link]: https://github.com/sitoi/ai-commit/network/members
[github-forks-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/forks/sitoi/ai-commit?color=8ae8ff&labelColor=black&style=flat-square
[github-issues-link]: https://github.com/sitoi/ai-commit/issues
[github-issues-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/issues/sitoi/ai-commit?color=ff80eb&labelColor=black&style=flat-square
[github-license-link]: https://github.com/sitoi/ai-commit/blob/main/LICENSE
[github-license-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/license/sitoi/ai-commit?color=white&labelColor=black&style=flat-square
[github-stars-link]: https://github.com/sitoi/ai-commit/network/stargazers
[github-stars-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/stars/sitoi/ai-commit?color=ffcb47&labelColor=black&style=flat-square
[pr-welcome-link]: https://github.com/sitoi/ai-commit/pulls
[pr-welcome-shield]: https://img.shields.io/badge/🤯_pr_welcome-%E2%86%92-ffcb47?labelColor=black&style=for-the-badge
[github-contrib-link]: https://github.com/sitoi/ai-commit/graphs/contributors
[github-contrib-shield]: https://contrib.rocks/image?repo=sitoi%2Fai-commit
[vscode-marketplace-link]: https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=Sitoi.ai-commit
[vscode-marketplace-shield]: https://img.shields.io/vscode-marketplace/v/Sitoi.ai-commit.svg?label=vscode%20marketplace&color=blue&labelColor=black&style=flat-square
[total-installs-link]: https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=Sitoi.ai-commit
[total-installs-shield]: https://img.shields.io/vscode-marketplace/d/Sitoi.ai-commit.svg?&color=greeen&labelColor=black&style=flat-square
[avarage-rating-link]: https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=Sitoi.ai-commit
[avarage-rating-shield]: https://img.shields.io/vscode-marketplace/r/Sitoi.ai-commit.svg?&color=green&labelColor=black&style=flat-square
